Events, logs, and accessing logs content (#533)
PegaSysEng/pantheon: docs/Using-Pantheon/Events-and-Logs.md

# Events and Logs

When a transaction is mined, smart contracts emit events and write logs to the blockchain.  

> Logs are associated with the contract address and included in the blockchain but logs are not accessible 

Reviewer: Logs are in separate storage to the blockchain, not directly in the blockchain - that's why log storage is cheaper than regular blockchain storage

Reviewer: How about: Logs are associated with the contract address but are stored separately to the blockchain and logs are not accessible

       "topics": [
        "0xd3610b1c54575b7f4f0dc03d210b8ac55624ae007679b7a928a4f25a709331a8",
        "0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000005"
       ]
     }
    ```

## Event Signature Hash

The first topic in a log entry is always the the event signature hash. The event signature hash is a keccak-256
hash of the event name and input argument types. Argument names are ignored. For example, the event `Hello(uint256 worldId)` 
has the signature hash `keccak('Hello(uint256)'`. The signature identifies to which event log topics belong. 

!!! example
    
    A Solidity contract with two different events: 

    ``` solidity	
	     pragma solidity ^0.5.1;
         contract Storage {
  	     uint256 public valueA;
         uint256 public valueB;
  
  	     event Event1(uint256 indexed valueA);
  	     event Event2(uint256 indexed valueB);
  
  	     function setValue(uint256 _valueA) public {
      	    valueA = _valueA;
      	    emit Event1(_valueA); 
  	     }
  	
  	     function setValueAgain(uint256 _valueB) public {
      	    valueB = _valueB;
      	    emit Event2(_valueB); 
  	     }
       } 
    ```

> The event signature hash for event 1 is `keccak('Event1(uint256))` and the event signature hash for event 

Reviewer 2: don't you have to add a second single quote at the end like `keccak('Event1(uint256)')` ?

2 is `keccak('Event2(uint256))`. The hashes are: 

* `04474795f5b996ff80cb47c148d4c5ccdbe09ef27551820caa9c2f8ed149cce3` for event 1  
* `06df6fb2d6d0b17a870decb858cc46bf7b69142ab7b9318f7603ed3fd4ad240e` for event 2

!!! tip

>     You can use an online tool such as https://emn178.github.io/online-tools/keccak_256.html to generate 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    You can use an a library Keccak (sha3) hash function as provided in [Web3.js](https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/JavaScript-API#web3sha3) or an [online Keccak hashing tool](https://emn178.github.io/online-tools/keccak_256.html) to generate
```

Author: Done

            ]
        },
        {
            "logIndex": "0x0",
            "removed": false,
            "blockNumber": "0x87",
            "blockHash": "0x6643a1e58ad857f727552e4572b837a85b3ca64c4799d085170c707e4dad5255",
            "transactionHash": "0xa95295fcea7df3b9e47ab95d2dadeb868145719ed9cc0e6c757c8a174e1fcb11",
            "transactionIndex": "0x0",
            "address": "0x42699a7612a82f1d9c36148af9c77354759b210b",
            "data": "0x",
            "topics": [
                "0x06df6fb2d6d0b17a870decb858cc46bf7b69142ab7b9318f7603ed3fd4ad240e",
                "0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000002"
            ]
        }
    ]
    ```

## Topic Filters

[Filter options objects](../Reference/JSON-RPC-API-Objects.md#filter-options-object) have a `topics` key to filter logs by topics. 

Topics are order-dependent. A transaction with a log containing topics `[A, B]` is matched with the following topic filters:

* `[]` - Match any topic
* `[A]` - Match A in first position 
* `[[null], [B]]` - Match any topic in first position AND B in second position
* `[[A],[B]]` - Match A in first position AND B in second position

> * `[[A, B], [C, D]]` - Match (A OR B) in first position AND (C OR D) in second position 

Reviewer: [A, B] doesn't have C or D in second position...
should this be
[[A, C], [B, D]]
?

Author: I double checked this and it's correct as written.  The following topic filter: 
"topics":[
["0xd3610b1c54575b7f4f0dc03d210b8ac55624ae007679b7a928a4f25a709331a8", "0xd3610b1c54575b7f4f0dc03d210b8ac55624ae007679b7a928a4f25a709331a9"], 
["0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000001", "0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000009"]]

Matches the following topics in a log: 
 "topics": [
   "0xd3610b1c54575b7f4f0dc03d210b8ac55624ae007679b7a928a4f25a709331a8",
   "0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000001"]

# Events and Logs

When a transaction is mined, smart contracts emit events and write logs to the blockchain.  

Logs are associated with the contract address and included in the blockchain but logs are not accessible 

> from within contracts. For example, logs can be used to display all transfers made using a specific contract 

Reviewer 3: -> [you can use logs] to display all transfers made using a specific contract[,]

Author: Done

but not the current state of the contract. 

> A Dapp frontend can either request logs using the [JSON-RPC API filter methods](Accessing-Logs-Using-JSON-RPC.md) or subscribe to logs using the [RPC Pub/Sub API](RPC-PubSub.md#logs). 

Reviewer 3: -> front end

Author: Done

## Event Parameters

Up to three event parameters can have the `indexed` attribute. Indexed parameters are stored as `topics` 

> in the logs. Indexed parameters can be searched and filtered.

Author: They can be but it's a keccak-256 hash of the string that ends up in the topic. Have now added this information.

The first topic is the event signature hash. 

> 

Author: Adding more detail on this.

Non-indexed parameters are included in the logs `data` but cannot be easily searched or filtered. 

## Topic Filters

[Filter options objects](../Reference/JSON-RPC-API-Objects.md#filter-options-object) have a `topics` key to filter logs by topics. 

Topics are order-dependent. A transaction with a log containing topics `[A, B]` is matched with the following topic filters:

* `[]` - Match any topic
* `[A]` - Match A in first position 
* `[[null], [B]]` - Match any topic in first position AND B in second position
* `[[A],[B]]` - Match A in first position AND B in second position
* `[[A, B], [C, D]]` - Match (A OR B) in first position AND (C OR D) in second position 

### Example  

The following Solidity contract stores one indexed and one non-indexed parameter and the event emits the value of each parameter. 

> ```json

Author: Done

pragma solidity ^0.5.1;
contract Storage {
	uint256 public valueIndexed;
	uint256 public valueNotIndexed;

	event Event1(uint256 indexed valueIndexed, uint256 valueNotIndexed);

	function setValue(uint256 _valueIndexed, uint256 _valueNotIndexed) public {
    	valueIndexed = _valueIndexed;
    	valueNotIndexed = _valueNotIndexed;
    	emit Event1(_valueIndexed, _valueNotIndexed); 
	}
}
```

An example log entry created by invoking this contract with `valueIndexed` set to 5 and `valueNotIndexed` set to 7 is:  

```json
{
  "logIndex": "0x0",
  "removed": false,
  "blockNumber": "0x4d6",
  "blockHash": "0x7d0ac7c12ac9f622d346d444c7e0fa4dda8d4ed90de80d6a28814613a4884a67",
  "transactionHash": "0xe994022ada94371ace00c4e1e20663a01437846ced02f18b3f3afec827002781",
  "transactionIndex": "0x0",
  "address": "0x43d1f9096674b5722d359b6402381816d5b22f28",

>   "data": "0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000007",

Reviewer 3: The above looks like the typical format of a contract "data" field. Does this have more zeroes than expected?

>   "data": "0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000007",

Author: Data - 32 bytes. They're properties of the log object - https://docs.pantheon.pegasys.tech/en/stable/Reference/JSON-RPC-API-Objects/#log-object.

  "topics": [

>     "0xd3610b1c54575b7f4f0dc03d210b8ac55624ae007679b7a928a4f25a709331a8",

Author: The event signature hash is a keccak hash of event name and input argument types, argument names are ignored. There's a more detailed explanation here: 
https://codeburst.io/deep-dive-into-ethereum-logs-a8d2047c7371

I'll update the doc to make this clearer - it's mentioned on line 16 but clearly not enough detail.
